#### BERT & GPT

- BERT (encoder-based) : Masked Language Model (MLM) - find the probability distirbutuin of words corresponding [mask] for context words.

- GPT (decoder-based) : Causal Language Model (CLM) - find the probability distribution of the next word for a given word sequence.

#### GPT2

- After each token is generated, it is added to the input sequence. The new sequence is used as input to the model in the next step.

- Causal Language Model : A model is used to predict the sequence probability of words. Probability distibution for the next word, given past context.
    ```
    w_k = P(w_1, w_2, ..., w_k-1) 

    L1(u) = ∑logP(u_i | u_i-k, ..., u_i-1) => 이 objective(이전까지의 sequence로 다음 단어 생성)에서 가능성이 가장 크게 나와야 하므로 maximize 되어야 한다.
    
    L2(C) = ∑logP(y | x_1, ..., x_m) => 이 objective의 경우, 특정 task를 위해서 fine tune을 진행하고 난 뒤 (ex. classification), 그 task에 맞는 예측을 얼마나 잘 하는지에 관한 값이고 마찬가지로 잘 맞춰야 하므로 maximize되어야 한다.

    L3(C) = L2(C) + λ (두 likelihood의 균형) * L1(u) => 이렇게 설정하는 이유는 입력 x -> label y를 예측하는 task-specific likelihood를 잘하는지와 language modeling도 잘하는지를 모두 보기 위해서이다.
    ```

#### Limitations of the Fine-tuning Method

- Requirements of large task-specific dataset : need to build learning data for supervised training

- A new model must be trained for each different task

- Overfitting to a specific task.

#### In-Context Learning

- In-context learning involves the model understanding the context of the written prompt and generating answers. It learns and generalizes from the prompt text without fine-tuning.

#### Scaling law

- the performance of LM is closely related to the number of model parameters, data size, and computing power. As the size of model parameters and data increases, performacnce also improves

=> And enhanced performace is also related with its generalization abilities, and this scaling model and generalization ability let the ICL effective.

=> Large models learn better in-context.

#### Fine tuning vs. In Context Learning

- In-context Learning uses instructions in human language or examples to guide the model in solving tasks.

#### Three settings for In-context Learning

- Zero-shot Learning : The model is provided only with instructions in natural language, without any examples through the prompt

- One-shot Learning : The model is provided with just one example through the prompt

- Few-shot Learning : The model is provided with a few examples through the prompt.

#### Decoding methods for Generation
=> Decoding is the process of generating text from a language model by selecting the next token step by step, based on the model's output probabilities. Different *Decoding methods* balance coherence, diversity, and creativity in the generating output.

- Greedy Decoding : a method that involves choosing the most optimal option available at every decision point to reach the solution.
    ```
    y_t = argmaxP(y_t=w | y_<t) -> 현재까지 생성된 문장 기준, 다음 단어 후보들 중 확률이 가장 높은 것 하나 선택
    ```
    advantages : the computation is fast

    disadvantages : local optimum, lack of diversity

- Beam search Decoding : 여러 후보군 (k개)를 남겨 그 중에서 decoding, 생성을 하는 방식, random sampling

    disadvantages : it does not match the uncertainty distribution of text generated by humans


#### Sampling decoding 
=> selecting the next token *based on the raw probability distribution*, higher probability tokens are more likely, but not guaranteed to be chosen.

- Top-K Sampling : A method of sampling only from the top k tokens of the probability of distribution. Thus, reduce the chance of selecting low-probability of irrelevant tokens. 

- Top-P Sampling : A method of sampling from the smallest possible set of tokens whose cumulative probabilty exceeds a threshold p. 

- Temperature : A scaling factor that controls the randomness of the probabilty distribution before sampling. Affects the sharpness or flatness of the probabilty distribution by modifying the logits before applying softmax function.

| Decoding Method | Setting        | Coherence | Diversity | Creativity |
|-----------------|---------------|-----------|-----------|------------|
| Top-K           | Low (10)      | ▲         | ▼         | ▼          |
| Top-K           | High (100)    | ▼         | ▲         | ▲          |
| Top-P           | Low (0.1)     | ▲         | ▼         | ▼          |
| Top-P           | High (1.0)    | ▼         | ▲         | ▲          |
| Temperature     | Low (0.2)     | ▲         | ▼         | ▼          |
| Temperature     | Default (1.0) | →         | →         | →          |
| Temperature     | High (2.0)    | ▼         | ▲         | ▲▲         |